UNIVERSITY OF GLOUCESTERSHIRE
School of Computing and Engineering
BSc (Hons) in Computer Science
Improving Mental Health Patient Prioritisation in NHS
Services Using AI-Driven NLP Algorithms
Author: Supervisor:
Mo Seyda Dr. Abu Alam
March 18, 2026

Abstract
NHS mental health services are under growing pressure from rising demand and limited re-
sources, which increases the risk of delays in identifying patients at risk of self harm. Triage
teams rely heavily on referral text, yet current processes to review this information are time
consuming and can be inconsistent. This dissertation investigates how Natural Language Pro-
cessing can support risk-based prioritisation of mental health referrals. An existing AI/NLP
algorithm is enhanced and evaluated on anonymised referral style text, and then embedded in
a prototype decision support tool that simulates an NHS triage workflow. The work aims to
improve the detection of self-harm indicators, reduce manual workload, and inform the safe use
of AI in mental health decision making.
Dedicated to those working in mental health services.
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor, Dr. Abu Alam, for his guidance and
support throughout this dissertation. I also acknowledge the importance of the clinical and
technical resources that made this research possible.
3
Contents
1 Introduction 8
1.1 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
1.2 Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
1.3 Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
1.4 Research Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
1.5 Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
1.6 Ethical Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.7 Dissertation Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2 Literature Review 11
2.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
2.2 Natural Language Processing and Large Language Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
2.3 AI and NLP in Healthcare Decision Support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.3.1 Evolution of Clinical NLP Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.3.2 Existing Applications and Benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.3.3 Limitations of Existing NLP-Based Triage Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.4 Self-Harm Risk Detection in Mental Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.5 Technical Benchmarks and Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.5.1 Implementation with PyTorch and Transformers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.6 Integration into NHS Workflows and Ethical Governance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3 Methodology 20
3.1 System Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.1.1 High-level system architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.1.2 Data pipeline for model training and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.1.3 Model architectures and prioritisation logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.1.4 Simulated NHS triage workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2 Data Collection and Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3 Model Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.4 Evaluation and Prototype Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.5 Limitations and Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4 Results and Discussion 24
4.1 Model Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.2 Comparison with Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3 Limitations and Practical Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4
5 Conclusion 25
5.1 Summary of Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2 Implications for NHS and Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.3 Final Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Appendices 30
A Supplementary Materials 30
5
List of Tables
2.1 Comparative Analysis of NLP Applications Across Example Domains for slected
reserachs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
6
List of Figures
2.1 End-to-end NLP-driven referral triage pipeline used in NHS mental health ser-
vices, adapted from (Taylor, Kormilitzin, Lorge, Nevado-Holgado, and Joyce,
2024) and the Chronosig project. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.2 AI-assisted referral prioritisation workflow using Clinical Prioritisation Criteria
(CPC), adapted from (Abdel-Hafez et al., 2023). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.1 High-level architecture of the AI-driven NLP prioritisation prototype used in this
dissertation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.2 Data pipeline for training, calibrating, and evaluating AI-driven prioritisation
models for simulated NHS mental health triage. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.3 Comparison between the baseline TF–IDF plus logistic regression prioritisation
pipeline and the enhanced BERT-based AI-driven prioritisation pipeline. . . . . . 21
3.4 Detailed BERT-based risk prediction and prioritisation pipeline, including cali-
bration, thresholding, and queue scoring steps. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.5 Simulated NHS mental health triage workflow showing how AI-driven NLP out-
puts were used to support, rather than replace, clinician prioritisation decisions. 22
7
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1 Overview
Mental health services in the NHS face unprecedented demand, with increasing numbers of
patients requiring urgent assessment and intervention. The timely and accurate identification
of patients at high risk of self-harm is critical to patient safety and clinical outcomes. Yet
current triage processes are often manual, time-consuming, and subject to inconsistency.
NHS mental health triage teams must process large volumes of referral letters and clinical
notes in limited time, which increases the risk that subtle indicators of self-harm are overlooked.
Advanced NLP algorithms can offer a consistent, data-driven approach to flagging patients at
highest risk, thereby supporting more efficient and equitable triage. While NLP methods for
risk detection have been validated in various healthcare contexts, few studies have specifi-
cally focused on enhancing existing algorithms and deploying prototypes within simulated NHS
workflows. This dissertation addresses that gap by combining technical model enhancement,
prototype development, and rigorous evaluation in a setting that reflects real-world constraints
and clinical decision-making processes. By exploring how artificial intelligence and natural
language processing can enhance the prioritisation of mental health patients through the auto-
mated detection of self-harm risk indicators within clinical referral text, this work contributes
both methodologically and practically to the growing field of AI-augmented clinical decision
support.
Beyond the technical focus, this research is motivated by the practical realities of frontline
services. Any proposed system must be usable by clinicians who may not have specialist techni-
cal training, must integrate with existing NHS workflows, and must respect the sensitivities of
working with vulnerable patients. The introduction therefore not only frames a computational
challenge, but also sets out a broader question of how AI tools can be designed in a way that
genuinely supports, rather than disrupts, everyday clinical practice.
1.2 Problem Statement
To determine patients’ immediate need for specialist intervention, current manual review relies
on clinician interpretation of free text, which is vulnerable to fatigue, time pressure, and sub-
jective variation. As a result, high-risk patients may be missed or deprioritised, while lower-risk
cases may consume disproportionate resources.
In addition, existing AI approaches in this area are often evaluated on curated research
datasets that do not fully reflect the messiness of real-world referral text or the constraints of
NHS settings. There is limited work that takes an existing algorithm, systematically enhances
it, and embeds it into a realistic triage scenario where practical considerations such as response
8
time, interpretability, and clinician trust are taken into account. This creates a gap between
promising research prototypes and tools that could plausibly be adopted in routine clinical
workflows.
1.3 Research Questions
This research intends to answer the following questions:
1. What is the capability of Natural Language Processing (NLP) models to identify indicators
of self-harm risk within mental health referral or clinical text?
2. How can enhancing existing AI algorithms improve the accuracy and reliability of patient
prioritisation in NHS mental health triage systems?
3. Why is it ethically and practically significant to integrate AI-driven risk assessment tools
into clinical decision-making for mental health services?
1.4 Research Objectives
1. To investigate current methods used for prioritising mental health patients in NHS triage.
2. To develop an AI-driven NLP algorithm to improve the detection of self-harm risk in
referral text and patient prioritisation.
3. To evaluate the enhanced algorithm and decision-support prototype in a simulated NHS
triage scenario.
1. To review and analyse current methods used for prioritising mental health patients in NHS
triage, so that the limitations and requirements for an improved NLP-based approach are
clearly understood.
2. To design and develop an AI-driven NLP algorithm to improve the detection of self-harm
risk in referral text and patient prioritisation, so that risk signals are identified more
consistently than with current manual processes.
3. To implement and evaluate the enhanced algorithm and decision-support prototype in a
simulated NHS triage scenario, so that its performance and practical feasibility for clinical
use can be assessed.
1.5 Scope
This research focuses specifically on benchmarking and enhancing NLP-driven risk assessment
frameworks for patient prioritisation in NHS mental health triage, demonstrated through the
automated analysis of referral text for self-harm indicators. The approach addresses the chal-
lenges of clinical decision support in a high-stakes, data-rich environment and evaluates the
practical reliability of a prototype system within simulated NHS workflows.
9
Because direct integration and testing against live NHS systems is not feasible within the
constraints of an undergraduate project, this study instead constructs a simulated triage envi-
ronment. Referral-style text is collected and processed in a way that mimics NHS workflows,
allowing the technical approach to be evaluated while respecting data access, ethical, and safety
constraints.(new)
1.6 Ethical Considerations
Key ethical considerations include the following:
•Patient safety risks arising from false negative predictions that may fail to flag high-risk
patients, or false positives that may unnecessarily escalate cases.
•Transparency and explainability of model outputs to ensure clinicians understand how
risk assessments are generated.
•Bias and fairness in algorithm performance across diverse patient demographics and clin-
ical presentation styles.
•Data privacy and confidentiality addressed through the use of anonymised or synthetic
referral text, with strict adherence to NHS data governance and GDPR requirements.
•Automation bias mitigation by designing the tool as decision support rather than decision
replacement.
•Informed consent and stakeholder engagement to ensure that patients, clinicians, and NHS
staff understand how AI is used in triage processes.
1.7 Dissertation Outline
Chapter 2 presents a comprehensive literature review, covering existing NLP applications across
diverse domains, current use of AI in NHS mental health, and technical benchmarks. It also
identifies specific methodological and practical gaps in the literature that directly inform the
design of this study. Chapter 3 outlines the research methodology, including data sources, pre-
processing, model development, and evaluation protocols, with a focus on reproducibility and
alignment with real NHS constraints. Chapter 4 presents results and discussion of the enhanced
algorithm and prototype tool, linking quantitative performance metrics to their potential im-
pact on triage decisions. Chapter 5 concludes with reflections on the broader implications for
AI deployment in mental health services and recommendations for future research and imple-
mentation.
10
Chapter 2
Literature Review
2.1 Introduction
This chapter reviews the current state of artificial intelligence and natural language processing
as applied to healthcare decision support, with particular focus on mental health triage and
self-harm risk detection. The review examines technical benchmarks, existing NHS initiatives,
ethical considerations, and gaps in the literature that motivate the present work. Give a overview
of the sections in Lit Review for example Section 2.2 discuss NLP techhnology
2.2 Natural Language Processing and Large Language Models
This section introduces the key concepts and technologies in Natural Language Processing and
large language models that underpin the models developed later in Chapters 3 and 4.
Artificial intelligence refers to computational systems that can perform tasks typically requir-
ing human cognition, such as pattern recognition, decision making, and language understanding
(Morand´ ın-Ahuerma, 2022). Within AI, Natural Language Processing is the subfield concerned
with enabling computers to interpret, analyse, and generate human language in a meaningful
way. NLP combines techniques from linguistics, computer science, and statistics to extract
structured information from unstructured text, such as clinical notes, referral letters, or patient
communications.
Modern NLP relies heavily on machine learning, where algorithms learn patterns from large
datasets rather than following hand-coded rules. Early NLP systems used simple keyword
matching or rule-based grammars, but these struggled with the complexity and variability of
real-world language (Manning, 2015). The introduction of statistical machine learning methods,
such as Support Vector Machines and Naive Bayes classifiers, allowed systems to learn from
annotated examples and generalise to new text. More recently, deep learning architectures,
particularly neural networks with multiple layers of representation, have dramatically improved
NLP performance across a wide range of tasks (Le Glaz et al., 2021).
The most significant recent advance has been the development of transformer-based mod-
els such as BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers), which use self-
attention mechanisms to capture contextual relationships between words in long passages of
text (Devlin, Chang, Lee, and Toutanova, 2019). These pre-trained models can be fine-tuned on
domain-specific data, such as clinical records, to perform tasks like entity recognition, sentiment
analysis, and document classification with high accuracy (Zhang, Schoene, Ji, and Ananiadou,
2022). In healthcare, this capability is particularly valuable for processing the large volumes of
11
unstructured clinical notes generated daily, enabling automated extraction of diagnoses, symp-
toms, medications, and risk indicators that would otherwise require manual review (Ahmed,
Kornblum, Oliver, Fusar-Poli, and Patel, 2023).
2.3 AI and NLP in Healthcare Decision Support
AI and NLP have become practical tools in healthcare settings where clinical decision making
depends on large volumes of textual information. The ability to extract structured meaning
from unstructured clinical notes, referral letters and patient records has moved from research
into operational deployment, particularly in health systems facing rising demand and limited
clinical resources.
The NHS has been at the forefront of investigating these methods. Reviews of AI-driven
digital interventions in mental health now show that applications such as screening, triage
and risk assessment are technically achievable and, in early pilots, deliver measurable gains in
consistency and efficiency (Ni and Jia, 2025). These systems rely on machine learning models
trained to recognise patterns in clinical language that correspond to specific concerns. When
deployed properly, they can highlight cases requiring urgent attention and reduce the manual
workload that triage teams face.
Several initiatives have tested this approach in NHS mental health services. The Chronosig
project developed a BERT-based tool to prioritise referrals to secondary mental health services,
demonstrating that automated analysis of referral text could support faster and more consistent
decision making (Health Innovation Oxford, 2024). Multi-hospital studies using transformer-
based models have also validated these techniques for detecting self-harm risk across different
sites (Yang et al., 2023). The core method is similar in each case: pre-trained language models
are fine-tuned on clinical text to identify indicators of risk such as expressions of suicidal ideation
or mentions of prior self-harm.
The promise of NLP in this context is clear. Clinical triage relies heavily on subjective
interpretation of referral text, which can vary between clinicians and is vulnerable to fatigue
or time pressure. An automated system offers a consistent first pass that highlights linguistic
signals of risk. However, the technology has limitations. Models trained on one trust’s data
may not generalise well to another, and free-text notes vary widely in format, completeness and
language style (BMJ Open, 2023). There is also the risk of automation bias, where clinicians
over-rely on algorithmic outputs and fail to apply their own judgement.
Despite these challenges, recent evidence suggests that AI and NLP can improve healthcare
decision support when deployed with appropriate safeguards. The emphasis must remain on
supporting rather than replacing clinical decision making, ensuring that models are explainable
and that clinicians retain final responsibility for patient care.
2.3.1 Evolution of Clinical NLP Applications
Clinical Natural Language Processing has evolved from relatively simple rule-based systems into
sophisticated deep learning and transformer-based models that can operate at scale across entire
health records. Early work in clinical NLP largely relied on hand-crafted rules and dictionaries
to identify key terms such as diagnoses, medications, and symptoms in free text. The next
major step was the adoption of traditional machine learning approaches such as Support Vector
Machines and Naive Bayes. Systematic reviews report that such models could reach reasonable
performance, with many studies achieving accuracy or AUC values in the 0.70 to 0.85 range for
mental health-related tasks (Le Glaz et al., 2021).
The arrival of deep learning brought substantial improvement. Convolutional and recurrent
12
neural networks (CNNs and LSTMs) were used to learn dense representations of text directly
from data. In mental health and risk prediction, LSTM models were applied to sequences of
notes and encounters in electronic health records to detect suicidal ideation or future self-harm
attempts, typically reporting higher F1 scores and AUCs compared to traditional baselines (Le
Glaz et al., 2021).
The emergence of transformer-based models such as BERT marked another turning point.
Transformers use self-attention mechanisms to capture relationships between all tokens in a
sequence simultaneously, which is particularly useful for long, complex clinical narratives. Fine-
tuned transformers have been shown to outperform older approaches in high-stakes document
review tasks across legal, financial, and healthcare domains (Pai et al., 2023; Li, 2023; Le Glaz
et al., 2021).
In parallel, specialised clinical NLP toolkits have matured. Systems such as MedCAT pro-
vide concept recognition and linking to clinical ontologies, enabling large-scale extraction of
symptoms, diagnoses, and risk factors from routine clinical notes. Applied within the NHS,
such pipelines have been used to analyse electronic health records for remote mental health care
and crisis prediction (BMJ Open, 2023).
Most recently, there has been growing interest in adapting large general-purpose language
models to clinical tasks. However, their use in mental health decision support remains cau-
tious, due to concerns about hallucination, transparency, and data governance. Many current
NHS-oriented projects focus on fine-tuned, task-specific transformers combined with robust
evaluation, rather than direct deployment of general-purpose LLMs.
Case Study: NLP-Based Triage in NHS Mental Health Services
Recent NHS-oriented research has moved beyond isolated model evaluation toward end-to-end
triage pipelines that integrate NLP models into referral workflows. One prominent example
is the Chronosig project, which developed a transformer-based system to prioritise referrals to
secondary mental health services using free-text clinical information. The pipeline combines
automated language analysis with clinician oversight, reflecting the practical constraints and
ethical requirements of NHS triage.
As shown in Figure 2.1, referral text and historical clinical information are processed using
a fine-tuned transformer model to generate a prioritisation score, which is then reviewed by
clinicians rather than acted upon autonomously.
2.3.2 Existing Applications and Benchmarks
AI-driven NLP has found extensive application across industries, often demonstrating capabili-
ties that parallel or exceed those in mental health. Table 2.1... In customer service, transformer-
based architectures such as BERT capture complex linguistic patterns to classify customer feed-
back with high accuracy (Ismail et al., 2024). The legal profession uses Technology-Assisted
Review (TAR) to sift through documents, with research confirming that TAR is both more
efficient and effective than exhaustive manual review (Grossman and Cormack, 2011). Recent
studies have fine-tuned open-source LLMs to improve performance in predictive coding tasks
(Pai et al., 2023). Financial fraud detection applies NLP to analyse unstructured text from
financial reports, with BERT models achieving over 83% accuracy (Li, 2023). These systems
often use a human-in-the-loop workflow, which parallels the proposed model for clinical triage.
13
Figure 2.1: End-to-end NLP-driven referral triage pipeline used in NHS mental health services,
adapted from (Taylor, Kormilitzin, Lorge, Nevado-Holgado, and Joyce, 2024) and the Chronosig
project.
Source Application
DomainAlgorithms / Meth-
odsEvaluation
MetricsPerformance Scores
Ismail et al. (2024) Customer Ser-
viceBERT, LSTM (Senti-
ment Analysis)Accuracy,
Precision,
Recall, F185–95%accuracy.
Grossman and
Cormack (2011)Legal (e-
Discovery)Technology-Assisted
Review (TAR) using
SVMsRecall, Preci-
sion, Elusion>75%recall while re-
viewing<5%of docu-
ments.
Pai et al. (2023) Legal (e-
Discovery)Open-source LLMs
(e.g., FLAN-T5)Precision, Re-
call, F1F1-Score of 0.79with
minimal training exam-
ples.
Li (2023) Financial
Fraud Detec-
tionCNN, LSTM, BERT
applied to 10-K reportsAccuracy,
Precision,
Recall, F1BERT achieved
83.33%accuracy.
Le Glaz et al.
(2021)Mental
HealthcareSystematic review of
SVM, CNN, LSTM,
BERTAccuracy,
AUC, Preci-
sion, RecallModel performance
ranges from0.70 to
>0.95.
Table 2.1: Comparative Analysis of NLP Applications Across Example Domains for slected
reserachs
AI-Supported Referral Prioritisation in Clinical Practice
Beyond mental health, similar NLP-driven prioritisation pipelines have been implemented in
other areas of clinical triage. (Abdel-Hafez et al., 2023) propose an AI-assisted referral work-
flow based on Clinical Prioritisation Criteria (CPC), where machine learning models classify
referral urgency from unstructured text in order to support scheduling and resource allocation.
Although applied outside mental health, the architecture closely mirrors NHS triage processes.
14
Figure 2.2: AI-assisted referral prioritisation workflow using Clinical Prioritisation Criteria
(CPC), adapted from (Abdel-Hafez et al., 2023).
Figure 2.2 illustrates how machine learning models are embedded within an established
clinical workflow rather than operating as standalone predictors. This human-in-the-loop design
aligns with NHS governance requirements and highlights common architectural principles shared
with mental health triage systems, despite differences in clinical domain.
2.3.3 Limitations of Existing NLP-Based Triage Systems
Despite demonstrating the feasibility of NLP-driven mental health triage, existing end-to-end
systems such as ChronoSig and CPC exhibit several documented limitations related to perfor-
mance robustness, accuracy, and clinical applicability.
Reported evaluations of Chronosig indicate strong aggregate performance on retrospective
referral datasets; however, external validation across different NHS trusts and diagnostic pre-
sentations is ongoing. Performance is expected to vary across risk categories and clinical presen-
tations, particularly for patients with less explicit or indirectly expressed indicators of distress,
as is common in atypical presentations and certain demographic groups (Joyce et al., 2021).
This suggests a reliance on overt linguistic markers, limiting effectiveness in cases where risk is
conveyed implicitly or through temporal context.
Similarly, CPC-based architectures achieve competitive classification metrics but are con-
strained by annotation uncertainty. Risk labels are derived from clinician judgement rather
than objective outcomes, introducing label noise that directly affects achievable accuracy (Sy-
lolypavan, Sleeman, Wu, and Sim, 2023). Inter-rater variability in mental health assessment
further complicates performance interpretation, as misclassifications may reflect ambiguity in
ground truth rather than model error.
Both systems prioritise recall to minimise false negatives, a design choice aligned with patient
safety objectives. However, published results indicate elevated false positive rates, which may
reduce practical utility by increasing clinician workload and diminishing trust in automated
triage recommendations (Brann, Sterling, Frisch, and Schrager, 2024). Such trade-offs highlight
limitations in precision that are not fully captured by aggregate F1 or AUC metrics.
Generalisation remains a further challenge. Existing benchmarks are typically trained and
evaluated on datasets sourced from a limited number of clinical contexts. Prior studies cau-
tion that transformer-based models may overfit stylistic or institutional artefacts, resulting in
degraded accuracy when applied to unseen healthcare settings or populations (Cohen et al.,
2022).
15
Finally, current evaluations rely predominantly on offline performance metrics such as pre-
cision, recall, and AUC. While suitable for algorithmic benchmarking, these measures do not
capture downstream clinical impact, user interaction effects, or decision support effectiveness
in real-world settings. Prior studies in clinical AI caution that strong offline performance does
not necessarily translate into improved decision-making or workflow integration, leaving open
questions regarding operational reliability and practical accuracy (Kelly, Karthikesalingam, Su-
leyman, Corrado, and King, 2019; Topol, 2019).
Collectively, these limitations indicate that while existing NLP-based triage systems estab-
lish a strong foundation, their reported performance and accuracy remain constrained by data
quality, annotation subjectivity, and limited generalisability. These gaps motivate further inves-
tigation into improved risk feature extraction and calibration for NHS mental health settings.
2.4 Self-Harm Risk Detection in Mental Health
The detection of self-harm risk from clinical text is a critical application of NLP. Studies using
transformer-based and deep learning models have shown that patterns of language in refer-
ral letters and clinical notes can reliably predict patients at elevated risk. These approaches
typically combine entity recognition (identifying mentions of prior self-harm, suicidal ideation,
psychiatric medications, etc.) with document-level classification to assign a risk score.
The challenge lies in balancing sensitivity (catching all true high-risk cases) with specificity
(minimising false alarms). In clinical contexts, false negatives (missing a high-risk patient)
carry severe consequences, while false positives consume triage resources. Model development
must therefore prioritise recall, often at the expense of precision, and results must be presented
to clinicians with uncertainty estimates and supporting evidence (i.e., which linguistic features
contributed to the risk score).
2.5 Technical Benchmarks and Evaluation
Modern NLP model evaluation relies on standard train/validation/test splits (typically 80/10/10)
and k-fold cross-validation. The primary metrics are Precision, Recall, F1-Score, and AUC-
ROC. In healthcare applications, sensitivity and specificity are also important, as they directly
relate to clinical utility and the balance between missed high-risk cases and unnecessary alarms
(Le Glaz et al., 2021).
Pre-trained transformer architectures such as BERT and RoBERTa are commonly fine-tuned
on domain-specific text data using deep learning frameworks like PyTorch together with the
Hugging Face Transformers library (Wolf et al., 2020; Hugging Face, 2024a). These models are
computationally intensive and require careful hyperparameter tuning (learning rate, batch size,
number of epochs) and early stopping to prevent overfitting. In mental health research, fine-
tuned BERT models have been used to classify online posts or clinical text into suicidal versus
non-suicidal categories, achieving strong performance on standard metrics (Ji et al., 2018).
2.5.1 Implementation with PyTorch and Transformers
The purpose of this subsection is not to propose a new algorithm, but to illustrate a typical
fine-tuning pipeline for BERT-style models, so that later methodological choices in Chapter 3
are clear even to readers without day-to-day experience in deep learning.
In practice, fine-tuning a pre-trained BERT model for mental health risk classification follows
a standard workflow demonstrated in the official Transformers examples and PyTorch tutorials
16
(Hugging Face, 2024b; PyTorch, 2024). The process begins by loading a pre-trained model and
its associated tokeniser:
1
2from transformers import BertTokenizer ,
BertForSequenceClassification
3
4model_name = ’bert -base - uncased ’
5tokenizer = BertTokenizer . from_pretrained ( model_name )
6model = BertForSequenceClassification . from_pretrained (
7model_name ,
8num_labels =2 # high risk vs not high risk
9)
Listing 2.1: Loading a Pre-trained BERT Model
In listing 2.1 the model is not trained from scratch. Instead, a general-purpose BERT model
is loaded and adapted for a simple two-class problem (high risk versus not high risk). Fine-
tuning then adjusts the weights of this model using referral text so that its decisions reflect the
mental health triage task.
Clinical referral text is then tokenised into input IDs and attention masks suitable for trans-
former models:
1
2text = " Patient reports persistent suicidal ideation and recent self
- harm ."
3
4inputs = tokenizer (
5text ,
6padding =True ,
7truncation =True ,
8max_length =512 ,
9return_tensors =’pt ’
10)
11
12# inputs [’ input_ids ’] and inputs [’ attention_mask ’] are passed to the
model
Listing 2.2: Tokenising Referral Text
Listing 2.2 showcases the raw sentence is converted into numerical tokens and an attention
mask so that it can be processed by the transformer model. In practice, the same procedure is
applied to every referral in the dataset, producing consistent input representations for training
and evaluation.
Training uses minibatches of tokenised examples and an optimiser such as AdamW, following
the pattern in the Hugging Face text classification examples (Hugging Face, 2024b):
1from torch . utils . data import DataLoader
2from transformers import AdamW
3
4train_loader = DataLoader ( train_dataset , batch_size =16 , shuffle = True
)
5optimizer = AdamW ( model . parameters () , lr =2e -5)
6
7model . train ()
17
8for epoch in range (3) :
9for batch in train_loader :
10input_ids = batch [’input_ids ’]
11attention_mask = batch [’ attention_mask ’]
12labels = batch [’labels ’]
13
14outputs = model (
15input_ids = input_ids ,
16attention_mask = attention_mask ,
17labels = labels
18)
19loss = outputs . loss
20
21optimizer . zero_grad ()
22loss . backward ()
23optimizer . step ()
Listing 2.3: Simplified Fine-tuning Loop
Listing 2.3’s loop repeatedly shows batches of referral examples to the model, compares its
predictions with the true labels, and nudges the model parameters to reduce the loss. Hyperpa-
rameters such as batch size, learning rate, and number of epochs control how quickly the model
learns and how likely it is to overfit the training data.
After training, the model is evaluated on a held-out test set. Predictions are converted to
labels and standard metrics are computed using libraries such as scikit-learn, as is common in
published work on suicidal ideation detection (Ji et al., 2018):
1
2
3from sklearn . metrics import classification_report , roc_auc_score
4
5model . eval ()
6predictions , true_labels = [], []
7
8with torch . no_grad ():
9for batch in test_loader :
10input_ids = batch [’input_ids ’]
11attention_mask = batch [’ attention_mask ’]
12labels = batch [’labels ’]
13
14outputs = model ( input_ids = input_ids ,
15attention_mask = attention_mask )
16logits = outputs . logits
17preds = logits . argmax (dim =1)
18
19predictions . extend ( preds .cpu (). numpy ())
20true_labels . extend ( labels .cpu (). numpy ())
21
22print ( classification_report ( true_labels , predictions ,
23target_names =[ ’Not High Risk ’, ’High Risk ’]))
24auc = roc_auc_score ( true_labels , predictions )
25print (f"AUC -ROC : {auc :.3 f}")
Listing 2.4: Evaluation and Metric Calculation
18
Once training is complete, the model is tested on data it has not seen before. The code com-
putes standard classification metrics such as precision, recall, F1-score, and AUC-ROC, which
provide an objective summary of how well the model distinguishes high-risk from lower-risk
referrals.
This workflow closely mirrors the implementations described in mental health NLP studies
that fine-tune BERT for risk classification tasks, where reported AUC and F1-Score values
typically exceed those of traditional machine learning baselines (Ji et al., 2018).
2.6 Integration into NHS Workflows and Ethical Governance
While the previous sections focused on model architectures and performance metrics, successful
integration of AI into NHS triage also depends on organisational, ethical, and governance factors.
Technical accuracy alone is not sufficient; stakeholder buy-in, robust data governance, and
mitigation of known risks are equally important. Clinicians must understand how the algorithm
generates scores, and the system must be designed as decision support (highlighting candidates
for urgent review) rather than decision replacement (automatically determining triage priority).
Data governance is paramount. All patient data used for training, validation, and testing
must be anonymised, stored securely, and accessed only by authorised personnel. Models must
be regularly audited for bias, particularly across patient demographics, and performance must
be continuously monitored in live settings to detect model drift or unintended failures.
Ethical considerations include the responsibility to avoid reinforcing historical biases in
data, ensuring that false positives and false negatives are clearly communicated to clinicians,
and maintaining transparency regarding model limitations.
These considerations build on the ethical themes outlined in Chapter 1 and frame the constraints
within which any NLP-based triage prototype must operate in NHS mental health services.
19
Chapter 3
Methodology
This chapter describes the methodological approach adopted for the design, enhancement, and
evaluation of an NLP-driven mental health triage system. This dissertation employs a mixed-
methods approach, combining technical model development (quantitative) with qualitative eval-
uation of practical integration into simulated NHS workflows. The aim is to demonstrate that
enhanced NLP algorithms can improve risk detection while remaining operationally feasible and
aligned with real-world triage constraints.
3.1 System Design
The system proposed in this dissertation built on the end-to-end architectures described in
aforementioned Figures 2.1 and 2.2. While these earlier pipelines demonstrated the feasibility
of NLP-driven triage, they left open questions around enhanced risk feature extraction, model
calibration, and explicit prioritisation logic in NHS mental health settings, which this work
addressed.
Rather than connecting directly to live NHS referral systems, the prototype was implemented
within a simulated triage environment. A simple web-based frontend was used to collect referral-
like free-text descriptions and basic metadata, which were then processed by an AI-driven
back-end model trained on anonymised or synthetic referral datasets. The model produced a
calibrated risk score and suggested priority band that could be used to order cases within a
clinician-facing triage queue.
3.1.1 High-level system architecture
Figure 3.1 illustrates the overall architecture of the AI-driven NLP prioritisation prototype.
Incoming referral-style text and simple metadata were captured through a lightweight web or
chat interface, forwarded to a FastAPI-based back-end, and passed to an NLP risk scoring
module built around a BERT-based classifier. The resulting risk probability was then fed into a
prioritisation and triage component that mapped scores to priority bands, generated a sortable
prioritisation score, and exposed a prioritised referral list through a clinician triage interface for
review rather than automatic action.
Figure 3.1: High-level architecture of the AI-driven NLP prioritisation prototype used in this
dissertation.
20
3.1.2 Data pipeline for model training and evaluation
The full data pipeline for training and evaluating the prioritisation models is shown in Figure 3.2.
Multiple referral-style free-text sources were combined, including anonymised datasets and open
mental health corpora, together with synthetic triage labels and derived priority bands. These
inputs were cleaned, de-identified, tokenised, and label-harmonised before being split into train,
validation, and test sets. The splits were then used to train a baseline TF–IDF plus logistic
regression model, an intermediate deep learning model, and an enhanced BERT-based classifier.
On top of these models, a prioritisation logic layer performed probability calibration, threshold
tuning, priority band mapping, and queue ordering, which were evaluated using both standard
classification metrics and prioritisation-focused metrics such as the proportion of high-risk cases
appearing near the top of the queue and the average rank of high-risk referrals.
Figure 3.2: Data pipeline for training, calibrating, and evaluating AI-driven prioritisation mod-
els for simulated NHS mental health triage.
3.1.3 Model architectures and prioritisation logic
Figure 3.3 compares the baseline and enhanced AI pipelines used in this study. The baseline
route applied standard preprocessing and TF–IDF feature extraction followed by a logistic
regression classifier that output a binary risk label, which was then mapped to a simple priority
category and used to construct a sorted queue. In contrast, the enhanced route employed a
BERT encoder and classification head to estimate a continuous risk probability, which was
calibrated, thresholded into high, medium, and low priority bands, and then passed into a
prioritisation module that produced an ordered triage list.
Figure 3.3: Comparison between the baseline TF–IDF plus logistic regression prioritisation
pipeline and the enhanced BERT-based AI-driven prioritisation pipeline.
The internal structure of the enhanced model and prioritisation pipeline is expanded in Fig-
ure 3.4. Referral text and optional metadata were transformed into token IDs and attention
masks by the BERT tokenizer, encoded into contextual embeddings by the BERT encoder,
and passed through dropout and a linear classification layer to obtain logits. After applying
softmax to obtain class probabilities, a calibration step on the validation set aligned predicted
probabilities with observed risk, and tuned thresholds were used to assign priority bands. Fi-
nally, a prioritisation logic block converted the band and calibrated probability into a sortable
score, applied tie-breaking rules where required, and output a risk probability, priority band,
and prioritisation score for each referral.
Figure 3.4: Detailed BERT-based risk prediction and prioritisation pipeline, including calibra-
tion, thresholding, and queue scoring steps.
3.1.4 Simulated NHS triage workflow
To evaluate the system in a way that was compatible with the constraints of undergraduate
research and NHS data governance, the prototype operated within a simulated mental health
triage workflow, shown in Figure 3.5. On the patient or system side, referral-like text was
21
submitted, processed by the NLP risk model, and converted into a suggested priority band,
after which the prioritisation module updated the triage queue and presented a prioritised list
of open referrals. On the clinician side, staff accessed this list through a simple triage interface,
inspected individual referrals together with the model-generated risk score, band, and brief
explanation, then confirmed, upgraded, or downgraded the AI suggestion. The final triage
decision was recorded as feedback for later analysis of model performance and misprioritised
cases.
Figure 3.5: Simulated NHS mental health triage workflow showing how AI-driven NLP outputs
were used to support, rather than replace, clinician prioritisation decisions.
**prior art→gap→proposed system flow. (this high-level diagram flow of my system to
be added later on as a final model adapted and considered to be developed.)**
3.2 Data Collection and Preparation
The dataset will consist of anonymised or synthetic mental health referral text, sourced from
NHS records or constructed to reflect realistic referral patterns. Text will be preprocessed
(lowercased, tokenised, stripped of protected health information) and annotated with binary
risk labels (high risk / not high risk) based on clinical consensus.
https://www.kaggle.com/code/vedikagupta0/mental-health-text-classification-analysis https:
//psresnik.github.io/umd reddit suicidality dataset.html
3.3 Model Development
The baseline model will be an existing NLP classifier (e.g., logistic regression with TF-IDF
features). Enhancements will include:
•Fine-tuning a pre-trained BERT or RoBERTa model on the referral text dataset.
•Integrating clinical entity recognition (using MedCAT or similar tools) to extract struc-
tured features.
•Ensemble methods combining multiple model architectures.
3.4 Evaluation and Prototype Testing
Models will be evaluated using standard metrics (Accuracy, Precision, Recall, F1-Score, AUC-
ROC). The best-performing model will be embedded in a prototype decision-support tool and
tested in simulated triage scenarios to assess usability and clinical relevance.
3.5 Limitations and Assumptions
Key limitations include limited access to real NHS data (necessitating synthetic data or case
studies), small sample sizes, and inability to conduct prospective validation with live clinical
users.
•The prototype operates in a simulated NHS triage environment using referral-style or
chat-derived text rather than live NHS referral feeds. This limits the ecological validity
22
of the results and introduces potential differences in language style compared with real
clinical documentation.
23
Chapter 4
Results and Discussion
4.1 Model Performance
[Results section to be completed with experimental findings, comparative benchmarks, and error
analysis.]
4.2 Comparison with Literature
[Analysis of how results compare to state-of-the-art and existing NHS approaches.]
4.3 Limitations and Practical Implications
[Discussion of technical limitations, generalisability challenges, and real-world deployment con-
siderations.]
24
Chapter 5
Conclusion
5.1 Summary of Contributions
5.2 Implications for NHS and Future Research
5.3 Final Remarks
25
Bibliography
Abdel-Hafez, A. et al. (Oct. 2023). ‘Artificial intelligence in medical referrals triage based on
Clinical Prioritization Criteria’.Frontiers in Digital Health, 5.issn: 2673-253X. doi: 10.
3389/fdgth.2023.1192975.
Ahmed, M. S., Kornblum, D., Oliver, D., Fusar-Poli, P., and Patel, R. (Feb. 2023). ‘Associations
of remote mental healthcare with clinical outcomes: a natural language processing enriched
electronic health record data study protocol’. en.BMJ Open, 13.(2), e067254.
BMJ Open (2023). ‘Associations of Remote Mental Healthcare with Clinical NLP Models’.
BMJ Open, 13.(2), e067254. doi: 10 . 1136 / bmjopen - 2022 - 067254. Available at: https :
//bmjopen.bmj.com/content/13/2/e067254.
Brann, F., Sterling, N. W., Frisch, S. O., and Schrager, J. D. (Jan. 2024). ‘Sepsis Prediction at
Emergency Department Triage Using Natural Language Processing: Retrospective Cohort
Study’.JMIR AI, 3, e49784.issn: 2817-1705. doi: 10.2196/49784.
Cohen, J., Wright-Berryman, J., Rohlfs, L., Trocinski, D., Daniel, L., and Klatt, T. W. (Feb.
2022). ‘Integration and Validation of a Natural Language Processing Machine Learning
Suicide Risk Prediction Model Based on Open-Ended Interview Language in the Emergency
Department’.Frontiers in Digital Health, 4.issn: 2673-253X. doi: 10.3389/fdgth.2022.
818705.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. (2019). ‘BERT: Pre-training of Deep
Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding’.Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4171–4186. Available
at: https://aclanthology.org/N19-1423/.
Grossman, M. R. and Cormack, G. V. (2011). ‘Technology-Assisted Review in E-Discovery Can
Be More Effective and More Efficient Than Exhaustive Manual Review’.Richmond Journal
of Law & Technology, 17.(3), p. 11. Available at: https://scholarship.richmond.edu/jolt/
vol17/iss3/5.
Health Innovation Oxford (2024).Augmenting Clinical Decision Making with Chronosig. Ac-
cessed: 17 November 2025. Available at: https : / / www . oahp . org . uk / case - studies /
augmenting-clinical-decision-making-with-chronosig/.
Hugging Face (2024a).Fine-tuning a pretrained model. Available at: https://huggingface.co/
docs/transformers/training.
Hugging Face (2024b).PyTorch Text Classification Examples. Available at: https://github.
com/huggingface/transformers/tree/main/examples/pytorch/text-classification.
26
Ismail, W. S. et al. (2024). ‘Enhancing Customer Experience through Sentiment Analysis and
Natural Language Processing in E-commerce’.Journal of Wireless Mobile Networks, Ubiq-
uitous Computing, and Dependable Applications, Available at: https://jowua.com/wp-
content/uploads/2024/10/2024.I3.005.pdf.
Ji, S. et al. (2018). ‘Supervised Learning for Suicidal Ideation Detection in Online User Con-
tent’.Complexity, 2018, p. 6662555. doi: 10 . 1155 / 2021 / 6662555. Available at: https :
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1155/2018/6157249.
Joyce, D. W., Kormilitzin, A., Hamer-Hunt, J., James, A., Nevado-Holgado, A., and Cipriani, A.
(Dec. 2021).CHRONOSIG: Digital Triage for Secondary Mental Healthcare using Natural
Language Processing - rationale and protocol. doi: 10.1101/2021.11.23.21266750.
Kelly, C. J., Karthikesalingam, A., Suleyman, M., Corrado, G., and King, D. (Dec. 2019). ‘Key
challenges for delivering clinical impact with artificial intelligence’.BMC Medicine, 17 (1),
p. 195.issn: 1741-7015. doi: 10.1186/s12916-019-1426-2.
Le Glaz, A. et al. (2021). ‘Machine Learning and Natural Language Processing in Mental Health:
Systematic Review’.Journal of Medical Internet Research, 23.(5), e15708. doi: 10.2196/
15708. Available at: https://www.jmir.org/2021/5/e15708/.
Li, Q. (2023). ‘Textual Data Mining for Financial Fraud Detection: A Deep Learning Approach
for Analyzing 10-K Reports’.arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03800, doi: 10.48550/arxiv.2308.
03800. Available at: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.03800.
Manning, C. D. (Dec. 2015). ‘Last Words: Computational Linguistics and Deep Learning’.
Computational Linguistics, 41.(4), pp. 701–707. doi: doi:10.1162/coli a00239. Available at:
https://aclanthology.org/J15-4006/.
Morand´ ın-Ahuerma, F. (2022). ‘What is Artificial Intelligence?’International Journal of Re-
search Publication and Reviews, Available at: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
272337301.
Ni, Y. and Jia, F. (2025). ‘A Scoping Review of AI-Driven Digital Interventions in Men-
tal Health Care: Mapping Applications Across Screening, Support, Monitoring, Preven-
tion, and Clinical Education’.Healthcare, 13.(10), p. 1205.issn: 2227-9032. doi: 10.3390/
healthcare13101205. Available at: https://www.mdpi.com/2227-9032/13/10/1205.
Pai, S. et al. (2023). ‘Exploration of Open Large Language Models for eDiscovery’.Proceedings
of the Second Workshop on Natural Language Processing for Legal Tech. Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp. 188–198. Available at: https://aclanthology.org/2023.nllp-
1.17.
PyTorch (2024).Text Classification with the Torchtext Library. Available at: https://pytorch.
org/tutorials/beginner/text sentiment ngrams tutorial.html.
Sylolypavan, A., Sleeman, D., Wu, H., and Sim, M. (Feb. 2023). ‘The impact of inconsistent
human annotations on AI driven clinical decision making’.npj Digital Medicine, 6 (1), p. 26.
issn: 2398-6352. doi: 10.1038/s41746-023-00773-3.
Taylor, N., Kormilitzin, A., Lorge, I., Nevado-Holgado, A., and Joyce, D. W. (Mar. 2024).
‘Bespoke Large Language Models for Digital Triage Assistance in Mental Health Care’.
Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.19790.
27
Topol, E. J. (2019). ‘High-performance medicine: the convergence of human and artificial intel-
ligence’.Nature Medicine, 25, pp. 44 –56. Available at: https://api.semanticscholar.org/
CorpusID:57574615.
Wolf, T. et al. (Oct. 2020). ‘Transformers: State-of-the-Art Natural Language Processing’.Pro-
ceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
System Demonstrations. Ed. by Q. Liu and D. Schlangen. Online: Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pp. 38–45. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp- demos.6. Available at:
https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-demos.6/.
Yang, X. et al. (2023). ‘Natural Language Processing of Multi-Hospital Electronic Health
Records for Mental Health Risk Detection’.Nature Computational Science, PMC10955903.
Available at: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10955903/.
Zhang, T., Schoene, A. M., Ji, S., and Ananiadou, S. (2022). ‘Natural language processing
applied to mental illness detection: a narrative review’.npj Digital Medicine, 5.(1), p. 46.
doi: 10.1038/s41746-022-00589-7. Available at: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41746-
022-00589-7.
28
Appendices
29
Appendix A
Supplementary Materials
[Include additional tables, figures, code snippets, or ethics documentation as needed.]
30